notes.md, before:

# Notes
Enclosure is more than just a simple barrier or boundary: it is a severing of the ties that connect us to other people and living creatures, while uprooting us from the land and, more generally, our sense of place.

Winstanley Movie Night

Both knowledge and land must be given back to the whole at some point

via [_On the Commons_](http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/%E2%80%9Cstealing-common-goose%E2%80%9D#sthash.V1isYy7t.hvRTkOB9.dpbs):

> The law locks up the man or woman  
> Who steals the goose off the common  
> But leaves the greater villain loose  
> Who steals the common from the goose.  
>   
> The law demands that we atone  
> When we take things we do not own  
> But leaves the lords and ladies fine  
> Who takes things that are yours and mine.  
>   
> The poor and wretched don’t escape  
> If they conspire the law to break;  
> This must be so but they endure  
> Those who conspire to make the law.  
>   
> The law locks up the man or woman  
> Who steals the goose from off the common  
> And geese will still a common lack  
> Till they go and steal it back.  


## Outline of the Narrative
- A tale of two movements: FOSS and Local Food movements, circa 2005
  - My own personal encounters with these movements
  - Both mvmts' strengths, innovations and foresight
  - Both mvmts' weaknesses, missed opportunities and constricted field of view
- The broader tradition of the commons
  - Agriculture, food and land use
  - Technology, culture and information
- Reuniting agricultural and informational commons


## Timeline
- 2000 - USDA Nat'l Organic Program becomes federal regulation
- 2001 - _Fast Food Nation_ by Eric Schlosser
- 2001 - Napster shuts down; original BitTorrent client released
- 2001 - arXiv.org launches at Cornell
- 2002 - Budapest Open Access Initiative
- 2002 - Creative Commons publishes its first licenses
- 2003 - _Eldred v. Ashcroft_
- 2003 - The Pirate Bay launches
- 2003 - Public Library of Science publishes its first Open Access journal
- 2003 - Marcin Jakubowski founds Open Source Ecology
- 2003 - Wikimedia Foundation est'd
- 2004 - Wikipedia: 1 million articles in 100 languages
- 2004 - Stone Barns Ctr for Food & Ag / Blue Hill @ SB open
- 2004 - _Monsanto v Schmeiser_ (Canada)
- 2004 - Mozilla Firefox released
- 2004 - Facebook launches
- 2005 - YouTube launches
- 2005 - Yochai Benkler's TED Talk
- 2005 - Jimmy Wale's TED Talk
- 2005 - Hans Rosling's TED Talk
- 2005 - Whole Foods opens new flagship market in Austin (10.5k -> 800k sq ft)
- 2006 - Malik Yakini starts Detroit Black Community Food Security Network
- 2006 - _Omnivore's Dilemma_ by Michael Pllan
- 2006 - Twitter launches
- 2006 - DBCFSN starts D-Town Farm
- 2007 - iPhone launches
- 2007 - Radiohead releases _In Rainbows_ on a pay-what-you-want model
- 2007 - Open Handset Alliance est'd to steward Android OSS project
- 2007 - Mozilla Manifesto published by Mitchell Baker
- 2007 - The "housing bubble" bursts, triggering a global financial crisis
- 2007 - _Declaration of Nyéléni_
- 2007 - Joel Salatin, _Everything I Want to Do Is Illegal_
- 2007 - Michael Pollan's TED Talk
- 2007 - Lawrence Lessig TED Talk
- 2008 - The world's banking system collapses at the onset of the "Great Recession"
- 2008 - _Food, Inc._ w/ Michael Pollan & Eric Schlosser
- 2009 - Alice Waters spurs Michelle Obama to plant organic garden @ WH
- 2010 - WikiLeaks releases _Collateral Murder_ video
- 2011 - Arab Spring & Occupy Wall Street
- 2011 - _United States v. Aaron Swartz_
- 2011 - Joel Salatin, _Folks, This Ain't Normal_
- 2011 - _OSGATA v Monsanto_
- 2012 - Internet blackout in protest of SOPA/PIPA
- 2012 - Occupy the Farm on Gill Tract at UC Berkeley
- 2012 - Open Source Seed Initiative founded
- 2013 - Edward Snowden disclosures on NSA surveillance

## Outline of Topics & Sources
- History of GOAT
  - 2018 Conference: how to get farmers to use FOSS?
  - 2020 Conference that never was, plus Community Food Resilience
  - 2022 Conference: cooperatives, shared values, action
- Agricultural commons
  - ongoing history of enclosures and struggles to maintain the commons
  - the evolution of property rights alienation of the land
  - contradictions of US public lands, land grant colleges, nat'l parks, etc.
  - land trusts and resurgence of cooperative farming practices
  - Jose Luis Vivero Pol
    - ["Why Food Should be a Commons Not a Commodity"](https://ourworld.unu.edu/en/why-food-should-be-a-commons-not-a-commodity)
    - [_Frontiers of Commoning_ interview](https://david-bollier.simplecast.com/episodes/jose-luis-vivero-pol-treating-food-as-commons-not-commodites)
  - peasant food webs
- Software commons
  - Luis Villa
    - ["Resilient Open Commons"](https://blog.tidelift.com/resilient-open-commons)
  - C.J. Silverio, ["The Economics of Open Source"](https://2019.jsconf.eu/c-j-silverio/the-economics-of-open-source.html)
  - Lawrence Lessig
    - Free culture, Creative Commons, Code is Law
    - over-emphasis on the code, the architecture and other abstractions
    - Code
    - [Future of Ideas](https://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/bitstream/handle/10535/5710/lessig_FOI.pdf)
  - Yochai Benkler
    - ["The Commons as a Neglected Factor of Information Policy"](http://www.benkler.org/commons.pdf) (1998)
    - ["Free as the Air to Common Use: First Amendment Contraints on Enclosure of the Public Domain"](https://www.benkler.org/Free%20as%20the%20Air.pdf) (1999)
    - ["Coase’s Penguin, or, Linux and The Nature of the Firm"](https://www.benkler.org/CoasesPenguin.PDF) (2002)
  - James Boyle
    - ["The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain"](https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/lcp/vol66/iss1/2/) (2003)
  - C. Ford Runge & Edi Defrancesco
    - ["Exclusion, Inclusion, and Enclosure: Historical Commons and Modern Intellectual Property"](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2006.02.002) (2006)
    - ["Factors Affecting Farmers' Participation in Agri-environmental Measures"](https://www.academia.edu/download/71193474/j.1477-9552.2007.00134.x20211003-24337-153myma.pdf) (2007)
  - Anne Branscromb
    - ["Who Owns Information?"](https://archive.org/details/whoownsinformati00bran) (1994)
  - Josh Lerner and Jean Tirole
    - ["The Simple Economics of Open Source"](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w7600/w7600.pdf) (2000)
  - Hannibal Travis
    - ["Pirates of the Information Infrastructure"](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=758885) (2000)
  - Fred Turner, Stewart Brand, etc
    - New Left vs New Communalism
    - virtualization of communities
    - cybernetics
    - [The Californian Ideology](http://www.imaginaryfutures.net/2007/04/17/the-californian-ideology-2/)
  - bad actors: Richard Stallman, Eric S. Raymond, etc
  - GOAT Forum: ["What is Open Source?"](https://forum.goatech.org/t/what-is-open-source-reading-list/1328)
  - CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance
  - [Post-Open Source](https://www.boringcactus.com/2020/08/13/post-open-source.html)
  - [Protestware](https://techcrunch.com/2022/07/27/protestware-code-sabotage/)
    - [`chef-sugar`](https://github.com/sethvargo/chef-sugar)
      - see also [WIRED article](https://www.wired.com/story/developer-deletes-code-protest-ice/) (paywalled)
    - [`faker` and `colors`](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/dev-corrupts-npm-libs-colors-and-faker-breaking-thousands-of-apps/)
      - see also [Vice Motherboard article](https://www.vice.com/en/article/pawnwv/open-source-devs-reverse-decision-to-block-ice-contractors-from-using-software)
    - [`node-ipc`](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/big-sabotage-famous-npm-package-deletes-files-to-protest-ukraine-war/)
  - licenses
    - [Hippocratic License](https://itsfoss.com/hippocratic-license/)
    - [Peer Production License](http://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Peer_Production_License) (Copyfarleft)
    - [CoopCycle License](https://github.com/coopcycle/coopcycle-web/blob/v0.5.0/LICENSE) (CoopyLeft)
    - Anti-996 License (for fair labor practices in China)
    - ["no military use"](https://www.linux.com/news/open-source-project-adds-no-military-use-clause-gpl/) clause
- food commons and other extensions of commoning
- GOAT 2018 -> 2022 and beyond
  - Keren Reichler & Sarah Hackfort
  - Community Food Resilience
  - Skywoman
  - ETC Group's reports on digitization
  - CSIPM's webinar: "The impacts of digitalization on food systems and family farming"
  - Open Environmental Data Project's symposia
- "The Configuration Commons"
  - Co-op Cloud

Commit message:

Add notes on "Stealing Commons from the Goose."

notes.md, after:

# Notes
Enclosure is more than just a simple barrier or boundary: it is a severing of the ties that connect us to other people and living creatures, while uprooting us from the land and, more generally, our sense of place.

Winstanley Movie Night

Both knowledge and land must be given back to the whole at some point

### Stealing the Commons from off the Goose
via [_On the Commons_](http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/%E2%80%9Cstealing-common-goose%E2%80%9D#sthash.V1isYy7t.hvRTkOB9.dpbs):

> The law locks up the man or woman  
> Who steals the goose off the common  
> But leaves the greater villain loose  
> Who steals the common from the goose.  
>   
> The law demands that we atone  
> When we take things we do not own  
> But leaves the lords and ladies fine  
> Who takes things that are yours and mine.  
>   
> The poor and wretched don’t escape  
> If they conspire the law to break;  
> This must be so but they endure  
> Those who conspire to make the law.  
>   
> The law locks up the man or woman  
> Who steals the goose from off the common  
> And geese will still a common lack  
> Till they go and steal it back.  

Boyle's essay, as published by Duke Law in 2003, provides the most thorough commentary on the poem's provenance, at least that I have found to-date:

> Apart from being anonymous, the poem is extremely hard to date. It probably comes from the enclosure controversies of the eighteenth century. However, the earliest reference to it that I have been able to discover is from 1821. Edward Birch was moved to compose some (fairly poor) verses in response when he reported “seeing the following jeu d’esprit in a Handbill posted up in Plaistow, as a ‘CAUTION’ to prevent persons from supporting the intended inclosure of Hainault or Waltham Forest.” He then quotes a version of the poem. Edward Birch, TICKLER MAG., Feb. 1821, at 45. In 1860, a staff writer for the journal Notes and Queries declares that “the animosity excited against the Inclosure Acts and their authors . . . was almost without precedent: though fifty years and more have passed, the subject is still a sore one in many parishes. . . . I remember some years ago, in hunting over an old library discovering a box full of printed squibs, satires and ballads of the time against the acts and those who were supposed to favour them,—the library having belonged to a gentleman who played an active part on the opposition side.” The author then quotes the first verse as a “naive epigram . . . which forcibly impressed itself on my memory.” “Exon” Ballads Against Inclosures, 9 NOTES AND QUERIES, at 130-131 (2nd ser., Feb. 1860). The context makes it appear that the poem itself must date from the late 18th century. In other sources, the poem is sometimes dated at 1764 and said to be in response to Sir Charles Pratt’s fencing of common land. See, e.g., Dana A. Freiburger, John Thompson, English Philomath—A Question of Land Surveying and Astronomy, poster paper submitted to the History of Astronomy Workshop University of Notre Dame, (July 1-4, 1999), note 15, available at http://www.nd.edu/~histast4/exhibits/papers/Freiburger/index.html (last visited Dec. 19, 2002). This attribution is widespread and may well be true, but I have been able to discover no contemporary source material that sustains it. By the end of the nineteenth century, the poem was being quoted, sometimes with amusement and sometimes with agreement, on both sides of the Atlantic. See Ezra S. Carr, Aids and Obstacles to Agriculture on the Pacific-Coast, in THE PATRONS OF HUSBANDRY ON THE PACIFIC COAST 290, 291 (San Francisco, A.L. Bancroft and Co. 1875); EDWARD P. CHEYNEY, AN INTRODUCTION TO THE INDUSTRIAL AND SOCIAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND 219 (1901).

The paper from self-ascribed "independent scholar" Dana A. Frieburger, ["John Thompson, English Philomath — A Question of Land Surveying and Astronomy"](https://web.archive.org/web/20060718033403/https://www3.nd.edu/~histast4/exhibits/papers/Freiburger/index.html), is available on the Internet Archive. Contemporaneously with Boyle, or even preceding him by a narrow margin, David Bollier uses the poem as an epigraph to his 2002 book, [_Silent Theft: the Private Plunder of our Common Wealth_](https://archive.org/details/silenttheftpriva00boll/page/n13/mode/2up). Bollier also uses a different portion of the poem (not included in his or Boyle's epigraph) to an article for the _Boston Review_, ["Reclaiming the Commons"](https://www.bostonreview.net/forum/david-bollier-reclaiming-commons/), published June 1, 2002. It's unclear if this usage predates Boyle's usage, as Boyle's first footnote points to an earlier iteration of his paper, titled ["Fencing off ideas: enclosure and the disappearance of the public domain"](https://law.duke.edu/boylesite/daedalus.pdf), published in the Spring 2002 edition of _Daedalus_.

Peter Linebaugh's attribution, where he cites the same poem in _Stop, Thief!_, cites relevant scholarship on the commons from the 20th Century Marxist and tradition and critical theory, but I have not found specific reference to that poem in any of these works that I've so far been able to access:

> E.J. Hobsbawm, Primitive Rebels: Studies in Archaic Forms of Social Movement in the 19th and 20th Centuries (New York: W.W. Norton, 1959); and from the Warwick School of Social History, our collective’s Albion’s Fatal Tree: Crime and Society in Eighteenth-Century England (London: Allen Lane, 1975) and E.P. Thompson’s Whigs and Hunters (London: Allen Lane, 1975). Verso published a second edition of Albion’s Fatal Tree in 2011, and Breviary Stuff published a new edition of Whigs and Hunters in 2013. See also the “Frankfurt School” study by Georg Rusche and Otto Kirchheimer, Punishment and Social Structure (New York: Columbia University Press, 1939), and the influential work by Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, translated by Alan Sheridan (New York: Vintage, 1977).


## Outline of the Narrative
- A tale of two movements: FOSS and Local Food movements, circa 2005
  - My own personal encounters with these movements
  - Both mvmts' strengths, innovations and foresight
  - Both mvmts' weaknesses, missed opportunities and constricted field of view
- The broader tradition of the commons
  - Agriculture, food and land use
  - Technology, culture and information
- Reuniting agricultural and informational commons


## Timeline
- 2000 - USDA Nat'l Organic Program becomes federal regulation
- 2001 - _Fast Food Nation_ by Eric Schlosser
- 2001 - Napster shuts down; original BitTorrent client released
- 2001 - arXiv.org launches at Cornell
- 2002 - Budapest Open Access Initiative
- 2002 - Creative Commons publishes its first licenses
- 2003 - _Eldred v. Ashcroft_
- 2003 - The Pirate Bay launches
- 2003 - Public Library of Science publishes its first Open Access journal
- 2003 - Marcin Jakubowski founds Open Source Ecology
- 2003 - Wikimedia Foundation est'd
- 2004 - Wikipedia: 1 million articles in 100 languages
- 2004 - Stone Barns Ctr for Food & Ag / Blue Hill @ SB open
- 2004 - _Monsanto v Schmeiser_ (Canada)
- 2004 - Mozilla Firefox released
- 2004 - Facebook launches
- 2005 - YouTube launches
- 2005 - Yochai Benkler's TED Talk
- 2005 - Jimmy Wale's TED Talk
- 2005 - Hans Rosling's TED Talk
- 2005 - Whole Foods opens new flagship market in Austin (10.5k -> 800k sq ft)
- 2006 - Malik Yakini starts Detroit Black Community Food Security Network
- 2006 - _Omnivore's Dilemma_ by Michael Pllan
- 2006 - Twitter launches
- 2006 - DBCFSN starts D-Town Farm
- 2007 - iPhone launches
- 2007 - Radiohead releases _In Rainbows_ on a pay-what-you-want model
- 2007 - Open Handset Alliance est'd to steward Android OSS project
- 2007 - Mozilla Manifesto published by Mitchell Baker
- 2007 - The "housing bubble" bursts, triggering a global financial crisis
- 2007 - _Declaration of Nyéléni_
- 2007 - Joel Salatin, _Everything I Want to Do Is Illegal_
- 2007 - Michael Pollan's TED Talk
- 2007 - Lawrence Lessig TED Talk
- 2008 - The world's banking system collapses at the onset of the "Great Recession"
- 2008 - _Food, Inc._ w/ Michael Pollan & Eric Schlosser
- 2009 - Alice Waters spurs Michelle Obama to plant organic garden @ WH
- 2010 - WikiLeaks releases _Collateral Murder_ video
- 2011 - Arab Spring & Occupy Wall Street
- 2011 - _United States v. Aaron Swartz_
- 2011 - Joel Salatin, _Folks, This Ain't Normal_
- 2011 - _OSGATA v Monsanto_
- 2012 - Internet blackout in protest of SOPA/PIPA
- 2012 - Occupy the Farm on Gill Tract at UC Berkeley
- 2012 - Open Source Seed Initiative founded
- 2013 - Edward Snowden disclosures on NSA surveillance

## Outline of Topics & Sources
- History of GOAT
  - 2018 Conference: how to get farmers to use FOSS?
  - 2020 Conference that never was, plus Community Food Resilience
  - 2022 Conference: cooperatives, shared values, action
- Agricultural commons
  - ongoing history of enclosures and struggles to maintain the commons
  - the evolution of property rights alienation of the land
  - contradictions of US public lands, land grant colleges, nat'l parks, etc.
  - land trusts and resurgence of cooperative farming practices
  - Jose Luis Vivero Pol
    - ["Why Food Should be a Commons Not a Commodity"](https://ourworld.unu.edu/en/why-food-should-be-a-commons-not-a-commodity)
    - [_Frontiers of Commoning_ interview](https://david-bollier.simplecast.com/episodes/jose-luis-vivero-pol-treating-food-as-commons-not-commodites)
  - peasant food webs
- Software commons
  - Luis Villa
    - ["Resilient Open Commons"](https://blog.tidelift.com/resilient-open-commons)
  - C.J. Silverio, ["The Economics of Open Source"](https://2019.jsconf.eu/c-j-silverio/the-economics-of-open-source.html)
  - Lawrence Lessig
    - Free culture, Creative Commons, Code is Law
    - over-emphasis on the code, the architecture and other abstractions
    - Code
    - [Future of Ideas](https://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/bitstream/handle/10535/5710/lessig_FOI.pdf)
  - Yochai Benkler
    - ["The Commons as a Neglected Factor of Information Policy"](http://www.benkler.org/commons.pdf) (1998)
    - ["Free as the Air to Common Use: First Amendment Contraints on Enclosure of the Public Domain"](https://www.benkler.org/Free%20as%20the%20Air.pdf) (1999)
    - ["Coase’s Penguin, or, Linux and The Nature of the Firm"](https://www.benkler.org/CoasesPenguin.PDF) (2002)
  - James Boyle
    - ["The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain"](https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/lcp/vol66/iss1/2/) (2003)
    - [_Shamans, Software & Spleens_](https://archive.org/details/shamanssoftwares00boyl/page/n9/mode/2up)
  - C. Ford Runge & Edi Defrancesco
    - ["Exclusion, Inclusion, and Enclosure: Historical Commons and Modern Intellectual Property"](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2006.02.002) (2006)
    - ["Factors Affecting Farmers' Participation in Agri-environmental Measures"](https://www.academia.edu/download/71193474/j.1477-9552.2007.00134.x20211003-24337-153myma.pdf) (2007)
  - Anne Branscromb
    - ["Who Owns Information?"](https://archive.org/details/whoownsinformati00bran) (1994)
  - Josh Lerner and Jean Tirole
    - ["The Simple Economics of Open Source"](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w7600/w7600.pdf) (2000)
  - Hannibal Travis
    - ["Pirates of the Information Infrastructure"](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=758885) (2000)
  - Fred Turner, Stewart Brand, etc
    - New Left vs New Communalism
    - virtualization of communities
    - cybernetics
    - [The Californian Ideology](http://www.imaginaryfutures.net/2007/04/17/the-californian-ideology-2/)
  - bad actors: Richard Stallman, Eric S. Raymond, etc
  - GOAT Forum: ["What is Open Source?"](https://forum.goatech.org/t/what-is-open-source-reading-list/1328)
  - CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance
  - [Post-Open Source](https://www.boringcactus.com/2020/08/13/post-open-source.html)
  - [Protestware](https://techcrunch.com/2022/07/27/protestware-code-sabotage/)
    - [`chef-sugar`](https://github.com/sethvargo/chef-sugar)
      - see also [WIRED article](https://www.wired.com/story/developer-deletes-code-protest-ice/) (paywalled)
    - [`faker` and `colors`](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/dev-corrupts-npm-libs-colors-and-faker-breaking-thousands-of-apps/)
      - see also [Vice Motherboard article](https://www.vice.com/en/article/pawnwv/open-source-devs-reverse-decision-to-block-ice-contractors-from-using-software)
    - [`node-ipc`](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/big-sabotage-famous-npm-package-deletes-files-to-protest-ukraine-war/)
  - licenses
    - [Hippocratic License](https://itsfoss.com/hippocratic-license/)
    - [Peer Production License](http://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Peer_Production_License) (Copyfarleft)
    - [CoopCycle License](https://github.com/coopcycle/coopcycle-web/blob/v0.5.0/LICENSE) (CoopyLeft)
    - Anti-996 License (for fair labor practices in China)
    - ["no military use"](https://www.linux.com/news/open-source-project-adds-no-military-use-clause-gpl/) clause
- food commons and other extensions of commoning
- GOAT 2018 -> 2022 and beyond
  - Keren Reichler & Sarah Hackfort
  - Community Food Resilience
  - Skywoman
  - ETC Group's reports on digitization
  - CSIPM's webinar: "The impacts of digitalization on food systems and family farming"
  - Open Environmental Data Project's symposia
- "The Configuration Commons"
  - Co-op Cloud
