notes/outline-of-narrative.md, before:

# Outline of the Main Narrative
- Intro
  - Main thesis
- My FOSS narrative: from now BACKWARD to early 2000's
  - Stealing the commons from off the goose
  - GOAT 2018 - 20122
  - Rediscovering the commons, understanding enclosure
    - Lessig & Benkler
    - Boyle & Bollier
    - Linebaugh & Federici
  - Finding FOSS
    - Linux, Clay Shirky
    - Occupy & SOPA/PIPA
- My Ag narrative: from early 2000's FORWARD to now
  - Zucotti Park
  - Smart phones & social media
  - Locavores, slow food and organics
    - Joel Salatin, Michael Pollan, Eric Schlosser, Mark Bittman, Barabra Kingsolver
    - Marion Nestle, Nevin Cohen
    - John Gorzynski, Zaid & Haifah Kurdieh
    - _Food, Inc._, _Super Size Me_, _Food Matters_, _A Place at the Table_, _King Corn_
  - Chef culture & foodies
    - Peter Hoffman, Alice Waters, Dan Barber, Eleven Madison, order gas, Marion Batali, Momofuku, Martha Stewart, Anthony Bourdain
    - Florence Fabricant, Pete Wells, Lucy's Blog, "My Mom Couldn't Cook"
- Deeper history of the commons & enclosure
  - Medieval commons and their holdovers
    - Gerard Winstanley & the Diggers
    - Georgism?
  - 20th c. re-examination of the commons
    - Elinor Ostrom v. Garrett Hardin 
    - Marxian interpretations (metabolic rift, primitive accumulation, etc)
    - Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen and _décroissance_ (degrowth)
    - Colonialism as enclosure
  - Appropriation of agricultural knowledge & technology (along w/ land & labor)
    - Leah Penniman on seed saving
    - Judith Carney's _Black Rice_
    - Bollier/Pollan on USDA Organics
    - Vandana Shiva & Biopiracy
- Reuniting agricultural and informational commons
  - The Limits of a Liberal Theory of the Commons
    - "Session: Data Policy" and data rights like water rights
    - Maya Cohen's article, data stewardship & the right to exclude
    - The Commons (CPR) v. Open-access Regimes v. Public Goods
    - The post-Cold War "end of history" and other forms of near-sightedness
  - New Developments, Old Syntheses & Parallel Movements

Commit message:

Add note on breaking the narrative into 4 essays.

notes/outline-of-narrative.md, after:

# Outline of the Main Narrative
__NOTE:__ I now expect to break up the narrative (and accordingly this outline)
into 4 separate essays, something along these lines:

- My Road to the Free Software Movement
- My Road to the Local Food Movement
- The Deeper History of the Commons & Enclosure
- Renewing the Call for a Commons in Food, Land & Technology

## Original Outline
- Intro
  - Main thesis
- My FOSS narrative: from now BACKWARD to early 2000's
  - Stealing the commons from off the goose
  - GOAT 2018 - 20122
  - Rediscovering the commons, understanding enclosure
    - Lessig & Benkler
    - Boyle & Bollier
    - Linebaugh & Federici
  - Finding FOSS
    - Linux, Clay Shirky
    - Occupy & SOPA/PIPA
- My Ag narrative: from early 2000's FORWARD to now
  - Zucotti Park
  - Smart phones & social media
  - Locavores, slow food and organics
    - Joel Salatin, Michael Pollan, Eric Schlosser, Mark Bittman, Barabra Kingsolver
    - Marion Nestle, Nevin Cohen
    - John Gorzynski, Zaid & Haifah Kurdieh
    - _Food, Inc._, _Super Size Me_, _Food Matters_, _A Place at the Table_, _King Corn_
  - Chef culture & foodies
    - Peter Hoffman, Alice Waters, Dan Barber, Eleven Madison, order gas, Marion Batali, Momofuku, Martha Stewart, Anthony Bourdain
    - Florence Fabricant, Pete Wells, Lucy's Blog, "My Mom Couldn't Cook"
- Deeper history of the commons & enclosure
  - Medieval commons and their holdovers
    - Gerard Winstanley & the Diggers
    - Georgism?
  - 20th c. re-examination of the commons
    - Elinor Ostrom v. Garrett Hardin 
    - Marxian interpretations (metabolic rift, primitive accumulation, etc)
    - Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen and _décroissance_ (degrowth)
    - Colonialism as enclosure
  - Appropriation of agricultural knowledge & technology (along w/ land & labor)
    - Leah Penniman on seed saving
    - Judith Carney's _Black Rice_
    - Bollier/Pollan on USDA Organics
    - Vandana Shiva & Biopiracy
- Reuniting agricultural and informational commons
  - The Limits of a Liberal Theory of the Commons
    - "Session: Data Policy" and data rights like water rights
    - Maya Cohen's article, data stewardship & the right to exclude
    - The Commons (CPR) v. Open-access Regimes v. Public Goods
    - The post-Cold War "end of history" and other forms of near-sightedness
  - New Developments, Old Syntheses & Parallel Movements
